An Essential, Definite, and Clear Single Mudrā Sādhana of Glorious Vajrasattva Homage to the lama and glorious Vajrasattva! For the single mudrā daily practice of the all-pervasive lord of all the buddha families, the Glorious Vajrasattva, purify your mind with refuge, bodhicitta, and so on in appropriate length and detail. Then say: [OṂ] SVABHĀVA [ŚUDDHĀḤ SARVADHARMĀḤ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHO 'HAṂ] From the natural state of emptiness arises the pure universe and beings. In the center, on a lotus and a moon, a HŪṂ transforms into Vajrasattva, Brilliantly white with one face, two hands, peaceful and smiling. His right hand at his heart supports a five-pronged vajra And the left on his hip clasps the bell. He sits with magnificent presence. His hair is tied in a topknot capped with a wish-fulfilling jewel And bears a viśvavajra vajra and a half-moon. He wears the silks, jewels, and so on. He sits in full-lotus posture, Delighting amidst concentrating masses of rainbow-colored rays of light. The three syllables marking his three places and the HŪṂ at his heart emanate light That requests the wisdom deity to come-VAJRA SAMĀJAḤ! JAḤ HŪṂ BAṂ HOḤ merge them indivisibly. Again, rays of light emanate that invite the empowerment deities. They grant empowerments and purify obscurations; Akṣobhya appears as a crown ornament. At Vajrasattva's heart, on a moon, HŪṂ is surrounded by a white mantra māla Whose clockwise movement generates rays of light. They bring offerings to the noble beings And purify the obscurations of sentient beings, taking them to the state of Vajrasattva. As the rays return, they purify my obscurations and I receive the blessings. Recite Vajrasattva's hundred-syllable mantra as many times as you can. The number for mere familiarization with the approach phase is 100,000 mantras. To conclude the session, say: Bhagavān, all-pervasive lord Vajrasattva, Pacify my own and all sentient beings' negativities, faults, and habitual tendencies! Completely purify both emotional and cognitive obscurations! Quickly bring us to omniscience! The appearing aspect of the deity-his kāya-dissolves into the space of clear light. Again, the enlightened body of Vajrasattva manifests. Through this merit, may the negativities, obscurations, and habitual tendencies Of all sentient beings without limit be thoroughly purified. May they swiftly reach the state of Vajrasattva, The bhagavān of indivisible kāyas and wisdoms. Pray, dissolve, rearise, dedicate, and make aspirations with these words. This daily practice for King Jaḥ's tradition of meditation and recitation of Vajrasattva found in the Drukpa school's four Dharmas of immediate necessity was composed by my perfect teacher, Mañjuśrī himself. Maṅgalam! 
